Clean up of config docs. (#1669)
opendatacube/datacube-core: docs/installation/database/passing-configuration.rst

ODC Configuration (Details)
***************************

Open Data Cube configuration files, supported configuration options, and basic use cases and defaults
are described in :doc:`configuration`.

The Open Data Cube uses configuration files and/or environment variables to determine how to connect to databases.

Summary
=======

`Raw configuration`_ can be explicitly passed in, otherwise, configuration is read from a `configuration file`_.

> Data in a configuration file can be supplemented with configuration by `environment variable`_.

Reviewer: I think the wording could be improved, along the following lines:

The default behaviour is to read in configuration from a `configuration file`. Alternatively, `raw configuration` can be explicitly passed in.
`Environment variables` can also be used to supplement configuration data, or overwrite configuration values in a configuration file.

The configuration engine in 1.9 is not 100% compatible with the previous configuration engine.  Advanced
users and developers upgrading 1.8 systems should read the `migration notes`_.

.. _`configuration file`: #file-configuration
.. _`choose one`: #the-active-environment
.. _`environment variable`: #generic-environment-variable-overrides
.. _`migration notes`: #migrating-from-datacube-1-8

1. File configuration
---------------------

.. highlight:: python

If `raw configuration`_ is not passed in, ODC attempts to find a configuration file in the file system.

`Only one`_ configuration file is read.

If your previous practice was to extend a shared system configuration file with a local
user configuration file, then you will now need to take a copy of the system configuration file,
add your extensions to your copy, and ensure that the Open Data Cube reads from your
modified file.

.. _`Only one`: #Merging-multiple-config-files

1a. Default Search Paths
++++++++++++++++++++++++

If config file paths have not passed in through any of the methods below, 1b. through
1d., then the Open Data Cube checks the following paths in order, with the

> first readable file found being read:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no config file paths have been specified through any of the methods below (1b. through
1d.), the Open Data Cube will search for the following paths in order and use the
first readable file it finds:
```

> 1. :file:`./datacube.conf`    (in the current working directory)

Reviewer: Line 35 in `configuration.rst` should be updated to match this

Author: configuration.rst line 35 is just an example - the most common location that will usually work.  I'm trying to keep this level of detail out of that document.  I've added another crosslink to this file, how's that?

Reviewer: Ok, since `./datacube.conf` was the first path checked I assumed that was the preferred location for a configuration file to be, but that's fine. Crosslink is good, ty

2. :file:`~/.datacube.conf`   (in the user's home directory)
3. :file:`/etc/default/datacube.conf`
4. :file:`/etc/datacube.conf``

If none of the files in the default search path exist, then a basic default configuration is used, equivalent to:

.. code-block:: yaml

   default:
      db_hostname: ''
      db_database: datacube
      index_driver: default
      db_connection_timeout: 60

.. note:: Note
  This default config is only used after exhausting the default search path. If you have
  provided your own search path via any of the below methods and none of the paths exist, then an error is raised.

1b. In Python
+++++++++++++

In Python, the ``config`` argument can take a path to a config file:

::

    dc = Datacube(config="/path/to/my/file.conf")

The ``config`` argument can also take a priority list of config paths.

> The first path in the list that can be read (i.e. exists and has read permissions) is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first readable path in the list is used.
```

> If none of the files in the list no configuration file can be found, a :py:class:`ConfigException` is raised:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If none of the files in the list can be found or read, a :py:class:`ConfigException` is raised:
```

::

     dc = Datacube(config=[
         "/first/path/checked",
         "/second/path/checked",
         "/last/path/checked",
     ])

The config argument can also take a :py:class:`cfg.ODCConfig` object.  Refer to
the API documentation for more information.

1c. Via the datacube CLI
++++++++++++++++++++++++

Configuration file paths can be passed using either the :option:`datacube -C`
or :option:`datacube --config`` option.

The option can be specified multiple times, with paths being searched in order, and an error being
raised if none can be read.

1d. Via an Environment Variable
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. envvar:: ODC_CONFIG_PATH

>    If config paths have not been passed in through methods 2a. or 2b. above,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If config paths have not been passed in through methods 1b. or 1c. above,
```

   then they can be read from the :envvar:`ODC_CONFIG_PATH`` environment
   variable, in a UNIX Path-style colon separated list:

   ::

          ODC_CONFIG_PATH=/first/path/checked:/second/path/checked:/last/path/checked

2. Raw configuration
--------------------

Raw configuration can be passed in explicitly, without ever reading from a configuration file on disk.

> `Environment variable over-rides`_ do **NOT** apply to configuration environments defined in raw configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Environment variable overrides`_ do **NOT** apply to configuration environments defined in raw configuration.
```

However **new** `dynamic environments`_ that do not explicitly appear in raw configuration **CAN** still be defined by
environment variable.

> 

Reviewer: Add line:

Attempting to pass in raw configuration and a configuration file path simultaneously will raise a :py:class:`ConfigException`.

.. _`Environment variable over-rides`: #generic-environment-variable-overrides
.. _`dynamic environments`: #a-dynamic-environments
.. _`Raw configuration`: #raw-configuration

2a. Via Python (str or dict)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A valid configuration dictionary can be passed in directly to the
:py:class:`Datacube` constructor with the ``raw_config`` argument, without
serialising to a string:

.. code-block:: python

   dc = Datacube(raw_config={
      "default": {
         "index_driver": "postgres",
         "db_url": "postgresql:///mydb"
      }
   })

The ``raw_config`` argument can also be passed config as a string, in either INI or YAML format:

.. code-block:: python

   dc = Datacube(raw_config="""
   default:
     # Connect to database mydb over local socket with OS authentication.
     db_url: postgresql:///mydb
   """)

2b. As a string, via the datacube CLI
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> The contents of a configuration file can be passed into the ``datacube`` CLI via the ``-R`` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A configuration string can be passed into the ``datacube`` CLI via the ``-R`` or
```

``--raw-config`` command line option:

::

   datacube --raw-config "default: {db_database: this_db}"

> Output from a script that generates a configuration file dynamically can be passed in using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Output from a script that generates a configuration string dynamically can be passed in using
```

a BASH backquote string:

::

>    datacube --raw-config "`config_file_generator --option blah`"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   datacube --raw-config "`config_generator --option blah`"
```

2c. As a string, via an Environment Variable
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> If raw configuration has not been passed in via methods 1a. or 1b.
> above, then the contents of a configuration file can be written in full to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If raw configuration has not been passed in via methods 2a. or 2b.
above, then the configuration string can be written in full to the
```

:envvar:`ODC_CONFIG` environment variable:

.. code-block:: console

   $ ODC_CONFIG="default: {db_database: this_db}"
   $ datacube check    # will use the this_db database

> 3. The Active Environment

Reviewer: Could use a bit of an introductory paragraph, like the previous sections.

defined environment.

If no environment named ``default`` is known, but one named ``datacube`` **IS**
known, the ``datacube`` environment is used and a deprecation warning issued.
``datacube`` will be dropped as a legacy default environment name in a future
release.

3b. Specifying in Python
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The active environment can be selected in Python with the ``env`` argument to
the :py:class:`Datacube` constructor.

If you wish to work with multiple environments simultaneously, you can create
one :py:class`Datacube` object for each environment of interest and use them
side by side:

::

   dc_main    = Datacube(env="main")
   dc_aux     = Datacube(env="aux")
   dc_private = Datacube(env="private")

3c. Specifying in the CLI
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

The active environment can be selected in Python with the ``-E`` or ``--env`` option to the ``datacube``
CLI tool.

CLI commands that require more than one environment will have a second option for the second argument.
Refer to the ``--help`` text for more information.

3d. Via an Environment Variable
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. envvar:: ODC_ENVIRONMENT

>    If not explicitly specified via methods 3a. and 3b. above, the active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If not explicitly specified via methods 3b. and 3c. above, the active
```

   environment can be specified with the ``$ODC_ENVIRONMENT`` environment
   variable.

4. Generic Environment Variable Overrides
-----------------------------------------

> Configuration values in config files can be over-ridden by setting the appropriate environment variable.

Reviewer: It would be worth mentioning in `configuration.rst` that environment variables will overwrite the corresponding config file values

The name of overriding environment variables are all upper-case and structured:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ODC_{environment name}_{option name}

E.g. to override the :confval:`db_password` field in the ``main`` environment,
set the ``$ODC_MAIN_DB_PASSWORD`` environment variable.

Environment variable overrides are **NOT** applied to environments defined in
raw configuration that was passed in `explicitly as a string or dictionary`_.

.. _`explicitly as a string or dictionary`: #raw-config

4a. Dynamic Environments
++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is possible for environments to be defined dynamically purely in environment variables.

E.g. given the following active configuration file:

> .. code-block::yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```

     default:
         alias: main
     main:
         index_driver: postgres
         db_url: postgresql://myuser:mypassword@server.domain/main

and the following defined environment variables:

> .. code-block::bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

   ODC_AUX_INDEX_DRIVER=postgis
   ODC_AUX_DB_URL=postgres://auxuser:secret@backup.domain/aux

You can request the ``aux`` environment and its configuration will be
dynamically read from the environment variables, even though the "aux"
environment is not mentioned in the configuration file at all.

Notes:

1. Environment variables are read when accessing to a named environment (usually when just before

>    connecting to a database from that environment).

Reviewer: Not sure what this means. Is it trying to say that only the environment variables relevant to the active environment are used?

Author: Added " Dynamic changes to environment variables after first access have no effect."

> 2. An all-defaults environment is used when requesting an environment that does not exist.

Reviewer: I think this note should go in section 3

3. Environment variable overrides are not read for environment included in `raw configuration`_.

4. Environment variables are read to create `dynamic environments`_, even when `raw configuration`_ is

>    passed in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Environment variables cannot override values included in a `raw configuration`_, but can still
be used to create `dynamic environments`_.
```

4b. Environment Variable Overrides and Environment Aliases
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Aliases can only be defined in raw configuration or in config files - they cannot be defined
through environment variables.

i.e. defining ``ODC_ENV2_ALIAS=env1`` does NOT create an ``env2`` alias to the ``env1``
environment.

A configuration file may define an environment which is an alias to an environment that is to be loaded
dynamically and is NOT defined in the configuration file.

Aliases (created in raw config or a config file) **ARE** honoured when interpreting environment variables.

E.g.  Given config file:

> .. code-block::yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```

     default:
          alias: main
     common:
          alias: main
     main:
          index_driver: postgis
          db_url: postgresql://uid:pwd@server.domain:5432/main

> The "main" environment url can be over-ridden with **ANY** of the following environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "main" environment url can be overridden with **ANY** of the following environment variables:
```

> .. code-block::bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

   $ODC_DEFAULT_DB_URL
   $ODC_COMMON_DB_URL
   $ODC_MAIN_DB_URL

The environment variable using the canonical environment name (``$ODC_MAIN_DB_URL`` in this case) always

> takes precedence if it set. If more than one alias environment name is used (e.g. if both ``$ODC_DEFAULT_DB_URL``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
takes precedence if it is set. If more than one alias environment name is used (e.g. if both ``$ODC_DEFAULT_DB_URL``
```

> **AND** ``$ODC_COMMON_DB_URL`` exist) then only one will be read and the implementation makes no guarantees

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**AND** ``$ODC_COMMON_DB_URL`` exist, but ``$ODC_MAIN_DB_URL`` does not) then only one will be read and the implementation makes no guarantees
```

about which.  Therefore canonical environment names are strongly recommended for environment variable names where
possible.

4c. Deprecated Legacy Environment Variables
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Some legacy environment variable names are also read for backwards
compatibility reasons, however they may not work as expected where more than
one ODC environment is in use and will generate a deprecation warning if they
are read from.  The preferred new environment variable name will be included in
the text of the deprecation warning.

Most notably the old database connection environment variables:

> .. code-block::bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

.. py:currentmodule:: datacube

ODC Configuration (Details)
***************************

Open Data Cube configuration files, supported configuration options, and basic use cases and defaults
are described in :doc:`configuration`.

> The Open Data Cube uses configuration files and/or environment variables to determine how to connect to databases.

Reviewer 2: Can there be connections to multiple databases at the same time? If not, it might be more clear to talk about the/a database.

Author: Yes there can!  Several of the changes to the configuration layer in 1.9 are driven by the need for better support for multi-database scenarios.

(One db per `datacube.Datacube` object, but there can be multiple `Datacube` objects, each talking to a different database.)

Overview
========

The normal flow of configuration processing can be bypassed by `explicitly passing`_ in a complete configuration.

> Such explicit configuration blocks reading of configuration from environment variables.

Reviewer 2: Is this sentence missing some words, or does it mean "Explicitly passing in a complete configuration disables the mechanism of reading environment variables for configuration"?

Author: Ugh, it's badly worded and technically incorrect.  Thanks, will fix.

Otherwise, configuration is read from a `configuration file`_ and/or `environment variables`_.

One configuration can define multiple environments, so users must `choose one`_.

The configuration engine in 1.9 is not 100% compatible with the previous configuration engine.  Advanced
users and developers upgrading 1.8 systems should read the `migration notes`_.

.. _`explicitly passing`: #Explicit-configurations
.. _`configuration file`: #File-configurations
.. _`choose one`: #The-Active-Environment
.. _`environment variables`: #Generic-Environment-Variable-Overrides
.. _`migration notes`: #Migrating-from-datacube-1.8

> 1. Explicit configuration

Reviewer 2: This heading is "explicit configuration", but the following subsections appear to describe "raw configuration", and then the `ODC_CONFIG` environment variable comes in and doesn't look raw or explicit at all.

Is it too late to rename `ODC_CONFIG` to `ODC_RAW_CONFIG` so it is consistent with the other naming? (Or other way around, rename the `raw_config` parameters to just `config`?)

Author: Hmm. yes I have gradually migrated from "raw config" to "explicit config".  I will follow the in-code terms more closely.

      }
   })

The ``raw_config`` argument can also be passed config as a string, in either INI or YAML format:

.. code-block:: python

   dc = Datacube(raw_config="""
   default:
     # Connect to database mydb over local socket with OS authentication.
     db_url: postgresql:///mydb
   """)

1b. As a string, via the datacube CLI
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The contents of a configuration file can be passed into the ``datacube`` CLI via the ``-R`` or
``--raw-config`` command line option:

::

   datacube --raw-config "default: {db_database: this_db}"

Output from a script that generates a configuration file dynamically can be passed in using
a BASH backquote string:

::

   datacube --raw-config "`config_file_generator --option blah`"

1c. As a string, via an Environment Variable
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If raw configuration has not been passed in explicitly via methods 1a. or 1b.
above, then the contents of a configuration file can be written in full to the
:envvar:`ODC_CONFIG` environment variable:

.. code-block:: console

   $ ODC_CONFIG="default: {db_database: this_db}"
   $ datacube check    # will use the this_db database

> 2. File configuration

Reviewer 2: These sections seem to be sorted according to the code flow, but I would intuitively expect them to be sorted by commonality so the first subsection is what applies to most users. Who is the target audience for this document?

Author: The `configuration.rst` (Configuration basics) document will hopefully satisfy most users.  This is really for more advanced users including developers.

What order would you suggest?

Reviewer 2: I would suggest ordering the sections by popularity so people can stop reading the document after they have found the section that applies to their scenario, so if most users configure through a file, that section should come first. The a-b-c-d subsections are short so they can stay as they are.

If reordering the sections leads to terms being defined several sections after they are used, well, then it's perhaps better to keep the current order.

Author: Oh I see what you mean.  Yeah, I'll get on it tomorrow.

These comments have all been really helpful btw, thanks.

---------------------

.. highlight:: python

If explicit configuration has not been passed in, ODC attempts to find a configuration file.

Only one configuration file is read.

> This is different to previous versions of the Open Data Cube,

Reviewer 2: Should this and the next paragraph perhaps be moved to a migration guide (that should probably contain other things relevant for someone upgrading from 1.8l)?

Author: There's configuration migration notes at the end of this section already.

There's also a draft of the migration notes sitting there - will be integrated better into the docs in another PR.

where multiple configuration files could be merged.

If your previous practice was to extend a shared system configuration file with a local
user configuration file, then you will now need to take a copy of the system configuration file,
add your extensions to your copy, and ensure that the Open Data Cube reads from your
modified file.

2a. In Python
+++++++++++++

In Python, the ``config`` argument can take a path to a config file:

::

    dc = Datacube(config="/path/to/my/file.conf")

The ``config`` argument can also take a priority list of config paths.

> The first path in the list that can be read (i.e. exists and has read permissions) is read.

Reviewer 2: How important is the information within the parenthesis, can it be omitted?

I think the sentence gets slightly easier to read if the last "is read" is replaced by "is used".

Author: I kind of like the rhetorical assonance of the duplicated "is read", but fair point.

> If no configuration file can be found, a :py:class:`ConfigException` is raised:

Reviewer 2: The input is a list of directories according to the previous sentence, but this sentence talks about a file. I get that the file should be in one of the directories, but which file?

Author: It's looking for a configuration file, it goes through a list and uses the first readable one it finds.  If it gets to the end of the list, then no configuration file has been found.

   environment can be specified with the ``$ODC_ENVIRONMENT`` environment
   variable.

3d. Default Environment
+++++++++++++++++++++++

If not specified by any of the methods 3a. to 3d. above, the ``default``
environment is used.  If no ``default`` environment is known, an error is
raised.  It is strongly recommended that a ``default`` environment be defined
in all configuration files - either explicitly, or as an alias to an explicitly
defined environment.

If no environment named ``default`` is known, but one named ``datacube`` **IS**
known, the ``datacube`` environment is used and a deprecation warning issued.
``datacube`` will be dropped as a legacy default environment name in a future
release.

4. Generic Environment Variable Overrides
-----------------------------------------

Configuration values in config files can be over-ridden by setting the appropriate environment variable.

The name of overriding environment variables are all upper-case and structured:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ODC_{environment name}_{option name}

E.g. to override the :confval:`db_password` field in the ``main`` environment,
set the ``$ODC_MAIN_DB_PASSWORD`` environment variable.

> Environment variables overrides are **NOT** applied to environments defined in

Reviewer 2: "variables" => "variable"?

configuration that was passed in explicitly as a string or dictionary.

4a. Dynamic Environments
++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is possible for environments to be defined dynamically purely in environment variables.

E.g. given the following active configuration file:

.. code-block::yaml

     default:
         alias: main
     main:
         index_driver: postgres
         db_url: postgresql://myuser:mypassword@server.domain/main

and the following defined environment variables:

.. code-block::bash

   ODC_AUX_INDEX_DRIVER=postgis
   ODC_AUX_DB_URL=postgres://auxuser:secret@backup.domain/aux

> You can request the "aux" environment and it's configuration will be

Reviewer 2: "it's" => "its"

dynamically read from the environment variables, even though it is not
mentioned in the configuration file at all.

Notes:

> 1. Environment variables are read when configuration is first read from that

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this note.

The last period inside the parenthesis should be outside the parenthesis.

Author: Yeah, this whole section needs a good edit.

   environment (i.e. when first connecting to the database.)

> 2. As all configuration options have default values, it is no longer possible

Reviewer 2: I think the main point of  this bullet is that environments are dynamically created, so lead the bullet with the "An all-defaults environment is used when requesting an environment that does not exist."

Author: Ooh nice. Yes.  Even better, cut straight to the bullet.  That's all just waffle.

   to get an error by requesting an environment that does not exist.  Instead,
   an all-defaults environment with the requested name will be dynamically
   created.  The only exception is when a specific environment is not
   requested.  In this case, the ``default`` environment is only used if it is
   either defined in the active configuration file or has previously been
   explicitly requested from the same :py:class:`ODCConfig` object.

3. Although environment variable overrides are bypassed for configured
   environments by passing in explicit configuration, reading from environment
   variables to dynamically create new environments is still supported.

4b. Environment Variable Overrides and Environment Aliases
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> To avoid troublesome and unpredictable corner cases, aliases can only be

Reviewer 2: I think the "To avoid troublesome and unpredictable corner cases," can be omitted.

defined in raw configuration or in config files - they cannot be defined
through environment variables.

i.e. defining ``ODC_ENV2_ALIAS=env1`` does NOT create an ``env2`` alias to the ``env1``
environment.

A configuration file may define an environment which is an alias to an environment that is to be loaded
dynamically and is NOT defined in the configuration file.

> Aliases (created in raw config or a config file) **ARE** honoured when interpreting environment variables.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph uses the term "raw config" instead of the term that the defining paragraph earlier used.

.. code-block::bash

   $ODC_DEFAULT_DB_URL
   $ODC_COMMON_DB_URL
   $ODC_MAIN_DB_URL

The environment variable using the canonical environment name (``$ODC_MAIN_DB_URL`` in this case) always
takes precedence if it set. If more than one alias environment name is used (e.g. if both ``$ODC_DEFAULT_DB_URL``
**AND** ``$ODC_COMMON_DB_URL`` exist) then only one will be read and the implementation makes no guarantees
about which.  Therefore canonical environment names are strongly recommended for environment variable names where
possible.

4c. Deprecated Legacy Environment Variables
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Some legacy environment variable names are also read for backwards
compatibility reasons, however they may not work as expected where more than
one ODC environment is in use and will generate a deprecation warning if they
are read from.  The preferred new environment variable name will be included in
the text of the deprecation warning.

Most notably the old database connection environment variables:

.. code-block::bash

   $DB_DATABASE
   $DB_HOSTNAME
   $DB_PORT
   $DB_USERNAME
   $DB_PASSWORD

> are strongly deprecated as they will be applied to ALL environments, which is probably not what you intended.

Reviewer 2: I think things are either deprecated or not, so "strongly" can probably be omitted.
